But how and why did such a dramatic transformation take place? Archeologists believe that irregular climate changes in certain regions either reduced the availability of animals for the hunt or created seasonal variations that increased the prevalence of certain plants which made steady farming more advantageous. When these climatic changes occurred in the Fertile Crescent, hunter-gatherer communities began domesticating plants like rye, barley, lentils, chickpeas, and also cereals like einkorn and emmer—staple crops of early civilization and close relatives of modern day wheat. Irrigation techniques and selective planting of seeds increased the yield of these grains. At the same time, the first domestication of animals like sheep, goats, pigs, and cattle began.  Over time, cultivation and repeated harvesting and sowing of the grains of preferred wild grasses led to the development of domestic strains, or mutant forms of wheat with altered characteristics that were again preferentially chosen by farmers. Einkorn and emmer were some of the first subjects of this experimentation.The high yield and nutritional value of wheat along with its ease of storage and moderately short growing season were undoubtedly factors that contributed to its cultivation.Another asset was that, like other annual grains, einkorn and emmer are largely self-pollinating. This means that desirable traits manipulated or breeded by humans could be perpetuated with less risk of cross-fertilization with wild plants which might have less desirable traits like smaller seeds or seed heads. Other preferable traits were an evenly distributed ripening period and a reduction of the inedible chaff (glumes) that protects the seed kernels and which is separated from seeds during threshing. Domestication also improved the probability of positive yield of the seeds, which under normal circumstances don’t always germinate and form plants. The selected preference towards these or other preferable traits indicates a domesticated variety of cereal. Thanks to the observations, imagination, and experimentation of ancient peoples,  human civilization has been forever transformed by two wild grains. Text for pop ups on this map, note that Jarmo and Jericho are on the same paragraph, maybe when activated they should only activate same pop upCatal Hayuk (7500- 5700 BCE) is one of the most impressive early settlements. Located in what is now Anatolia, in southern Turkey, it may have housed up to 10,000 people and is by far the largest Neolithic settlement found to date. Evidence indicates that the people living here depended equally on hunting as on the cultivation of wheat, barley, peas, and lentils. Though sheep and goats were already domesticated, cattle domestication also began to emerge during this time. Catal Hayuk is an example of the dramatic ways agriculture transformed social organization. It could even be considered a small city by today’s standards. Unlike Jerf el Ahmar, Catal Hayuk did not appear to have public buildings. Instead, it was composed of individual, but closely constructed domestic structures each containing cooking ovens and hearths. Could this text scroll with the image fixed and as soon as it is over move to the next portion of the page with te wheat illustration below?This shift to a sedentary way of life was perhaps the most iconic change associated with the emergence of agriculture. These first settled communities were incubators for increasingly complex social organization, economic systems, religious beliefs, and artistic practices that germinated into civilizations of proportions and influence not seen before.THESE FIRST COMMUNITIES WERE INCUBATORS FOR COMPLEX SOCIAL ORGANIZATION, ECONOMIC SYSTEMS, RELIGIOUS BELIEFS, AND ARTISTIC PRACTICES.Whereas hand plows had been used prior, the advent of agriculture brought advances such as the domestication of animals which made preparation of fields for cultivation more efficient. The scratch plow (6,000 BCE) is a tool pulled by an animal, which turns over the upper layers of soil, burying weeds and old crops as it brings fresh nutrients to the surface in preparation for sowing a new crop.The sickle is one of the oldest farming tools. Though it was used in pre-Neolithic campsites for harvesting plants, during the Neolithic era, a standardized, improved design emerged to make grain cultivation more efficient.  The quern-stone (8000 BCE), is the oldest known tool used to grind grain into flour.  It was also used to grind fruits, herbs, spices, meats, bark, pigments, and other minerals used for the production of medicines and cosmetics.  It consists of a lower, stationary stone called the quern, and an upper, mobile, swiveling stone called the handstone.      Pop ups for bold words on the textMissing text with pull qoteHorizontal movement: scroll down activated or swipe. Texts should be on white te be readable, I just made them black to make them visible while they are offthe artboard Jerf el Ahmar is one of the world’s oldest settlements, dating back to 9,600 BCE and located in what is now northern Syria. A large subterranean structure exists at this site which archeologists believe was used as a communal storage facility. Later settlements like Jericho (founded in 9600 BCE), in what is now the Israeli occupied West bank, and Jarmo (7000-5000 BCE) in northern Iraq, there is a clear move towards the construction of residential communities made up of mud-brick houses containing individual grain storage structures, and eventually multiple rooms. In these early settlements sickles, bowls, storage receptacles, and other tools associated with the cultivation and storage of grain were also found. The lines on this page are thought to be drawn as the map zooms in with the scrolling commandThe first domestication of einkorn and emmer wheat has been traced to an area of the Levant in the Karacada? mountains in what is now southeast Turkey, between 8,500–7,000 BCE. What’s even more surprising is that some scientists estimate that it may have only taken 20 to 30 years for these domesticated strains of wheat to be developed.The first domestication of einkorn and emmer wheat has been traced to an area of the Levant in the Karacada? mountains in what is now southeast Turkey, between 8,500–7,000 BCE. What’s even more surprising is that some scientists estimate that it may have only taken 20 to 30 years for these domesticated strains of wheat to be developed.Burgeoning agriculture impacted more than just food cultivation. This was the start of humankind’s experimentation with modifying their natural environment, and in doing so, they began altering human society as well. Selective breeding supported surplus food production and populations gradually began to grow into permanent, centralized communities. This led to specialized work roles, new social hierarchies, and the emergence of government, trade and new forms of communication. The invention or improvement of tools and techniques developed by these early peoples to promote the cultivation of food also inspired the formation of new arts and crafts. The temples, deities, and religious symbols that these societies dedicated to agriculture reflect the significance of the dramatic changes occurring to human life. BOTH EMMER AND EINKORN WHEAT SHARE A NATURAL AND PRIMITIVE TRAIT: WHEN MATURE, THE GRAIN OF THE WILD VARIETIES FALLS TO THE GROUND SO THAT IT CAN BE SPREAD BY THE WIND.GOBEKLI TEPEArcheologists claim the first permanent buildings were constructed for communal or ritual purposes. An example is Göbekli Tepe (10,000 BCE), the first religious center ever built. The hundreds of massive, T-shaped stone pillars found at this site in the Karacada? mountain range, which is believed to be the place where wheat was first domesticated, were erected by nomadic groups just before the Neolithic era. SOCIAL STRATIFICATIONAs agriculture became the engine behind Neolithic societies, lifestyles were increasingly driven by the shifts of the growing seasons. Increased productivity and larger populations required specialized roles and responsibilities assigned to support this labor, while food surpluses and seasonal cycles meant there was more time for other concerns -no longer did everyone in the village need to dedicate themselves to food collection to ensure the community's survival.  This development paved the way for social stratification not seen before. Settlements like Catal Hayuk, despite its large population for the time, remained surprisingly egalitarian. However, when significant urbanization took place at the start of the Ubaid period (6500 to 3800 BCE), distinct gender roles and class divisions became increasingly predominant.  Households that once depended on each other for survival became economically independent and competitive as resources such as access to waterways, land and animal ownership, and trade privileges led to differentiated productivity among groups.  The emergence of a ruling class enforced and negotiated these divisions. Where decisions had once been made by the collective community, chieftains emerged with the authority to mediate conflicts and oversee economic and religious matters. The chieftains evolved into a ruling class with kings and city-states, and by the time of the Sumerians (5,000 BCE- 1750 BCE), there were governments that drafted contracts, established trade, granted land for irrigation, collected taxes, and enforced laws that safeguarded a clearly defined social order. TRADEThe existence of food surpluses created new opportunities for the evolving communities of the Neolithic era, and organized trade began to emerge, reflecting the needs required by larger populations. The commercial exchange of resources such as metals, animals, food, pottery, and tools demonstrated the sophisticated economic, religious and physical structures these early societies were erecting.   Trade was carried out with other population centers by specialized merchants, and the waterways of the Tigris and Euphrates rivers enabled the exchange of goods with distant communities. Meanwhile the similar styles of the region’s arts and crafts and common working techniques throughout the Fertile Crescent point to an increasing interdependency and collaboration.  RELIGIONThe significance of wheat for these early groups began to shape their religious beliefs. Images of deer, birds, and other animals were common in pre-Neolithic temples, but archaeologists studying Neolithic sites have found papyrus images, crafts and other artifacts showing Mesopotamian deities dedicated to wheat.  The Sumerian culture (5,000 BCE- 1750 BCE), located in modern day Iraq, was in many ways the culmination of the thousands of years of transformations that evolved over the Neolithic period. It is regarded as the world’s first urban civilization, and they worshipped specific deities such as Enten, a god of irrigation and agriculture and Ashnan, the goddess of grain. Sumerian mythology tells us her mission was to feed humanity.  The ancient Sumerians also had a goddess of beer, Ninkasi, who was responsible with overseeing the daily preparation of this popular drink. The female association with beer is evidenced in the Sumerian text Hymn to Ninkasi (1800 BCE).   Wheat and cultivation took on a new and widely diverse symbolism. It is no surprise that the female, associated with procreation, was also associated with wheat and harvest. Agriculture, after all, was directly sustaining the lives of these early peoples. The seasonal cycles of sowing, thrashing, collecting, then re-tilling the soil lent themselves to the emerging concept of reincarnation, rebirth, and continuity between life and death or between generations. These concepts coalesced into religious beliefs, rituals dedicated to the harvest of wheat. Still to this day, death is frequently depicted in many cultures with a scythe—the instrument that is used to sow the vital grain from its stem and which marks the end of a particular growing season. “From sunrise till sunset, may the name of Grain be praised. People should submit to the yoke of Grain. Whoever has silver, whoever has jewels, whoever has cattle, whoever has sheep shall take a seat at the gate of whoever has grain, and pass his time there.”CLOSING PROVERBFrom the Debate between Sheep and Grain (Sumerian creation myth)HYMN TO NINKASI...When you pour out the filtered beerof the collector vat,It is [like] the onrush ofTigris and Euphrates.Ninkasi, you are the one who pours out thefiltered beer of the collector vat,It is [like] the onrush ofTigris and Euphrates. POTTERYThe first potter’s wheel emerged during this time, and traces of a diverse array of pottery and other crafts, serving both practical and symbolic functions allowed archaeologists to chart the course of agriculture in Mesopotamia to tell the story of the earliest permanent settlements and their growth into urban centers.  (IMAGE?)Archeologists have found numerous, hand-crafted pots for cooking and storage, as well as clay figurines depicting the female form that appear to celebrate the harvest. These objects were used in both daily life and in worship, and were often placed in burial chambers where relationships between the afterlife, fertility and death were sown together by the allegory of the harvest, and its vital, life sustaining grains.   Pottery also reveals the significance of beer to the ancient Mesopotamians. Considered the drink of the gods, it was a staple drink of the ancient Sumerians. Images of people and gods drinking beer through the long straws invented by the Sumerians frequently appear on painted pottery.  (Images?)Despite the increasing stratification of the later Neolithic period, most of the population still labored as farmers and seasonal pastors, but cities then also contained specialized craftspeople: potters, weavers, and metalworkers whose creativity left an enduring legacy.  CUNEIFORM SCRIPTHow can we confidently describe the faiths and re-tell the stories of the oldest farmers and civilizations? The answer lies in another remarkable innovation of these Neolithic civilizations: the emergence of the written language. To be sure, this written language, called the cuneiform script—meaning ‘wedged-shaped” in Latin— looked much different than our own.  It first took shape in Mesopotamia and consisted originally of pictograms— a series of wedge-shaped marks on clay tablets. Eventually (between 3100 BCE- 2900 BCE) this script became more abstract and included simpler designs pertaining to phonetic sounds.  Initially, the clay cuneiform tablets served as administrative records listing the cultivation and distribution of grain in the community and the number of cattle and other animals in use. Between half a million and two million cuneiform tablets are estimated to have been excavated in modern times. Nevertheless, only approximately 30,000-100,000 of these have been deciphered. The most impressive of these is The Epic of Gilgamesh, which wasn’t deciphered until the 19th century. This Sumerian text, a compilation of many poems written in cuneiform script over the course of 2,000 years (the first one dating back to 2100 BCE) is just one of the many significant legacies left behind by the ancient Sumerians.  No doubt, however, the authors of this early written language still have many stories untold.  LAW MATHEMATICS, SCIENCEThe changes brought by agriculture evoked new concepts of time and place.  Life was oriented around the growing seasons of crops like wheat.  By 4000 BCE the Sumerians had developed a complex mathematical measurement system that resulted in the creation of arithmetic, geometry, and algebra as well as a lunisolar calendar.  These measuring tools originally served bureaucratic functions and enabled matters such as crop yields and distributions to be tallied.New measures for society also became necessary to organize the larger populations. The fortunes of agricultural abundance were coupled with new forms of order ranging from legal codes to military organisation. There is evidence that the Samarra culture had fortified walls and posts on the outskirts of their settlements and by the time of the Sumerians, the first descriptions of warfare were recorded. The Code of Hammurabi (1754 BCE), written in ancient Babylonia, in what is now modern day Iraq, is one of the world’s earliest written legal documents. It defines terms for subjects as diverse as divorce, theft, trade, slander, slavery, animal rental, and the duties of workers. There are even codes for the production and drinking of beer.  This legal code is emblematic of the complexity into which Neolithic societies had developed.  MIDDLE EASTFURTHER DEVELOPMENTS3500 Irrigation was being used in Mesopotamia (modern day Iraq) First aqueduct (approx. 50 miles long) constructed in 600 BCE to bring water to Nineveh, an ancient Assyrian city of Upper Mesopotamia, located in modern-day northern Iraq; it is on the eastern bank of the Tigris River, and was the capital of the Neo-Assyrian Empire.3000 Fermentation of dough, grain, and fruit juices is in practice (e.g. Egypt)3000 Water pump (Shaduf)3000 Saw in the Middle East3100 Bronze in the Middle East  3200 Wheeled cart in the Middle East3500 Wheels in Mesopotamia, the Caucasus, and Central EuropeEGYPTMIDDLE EASTINDIAGREECEROMELEPENSKI VIRSCANDINAVIABRITISH ISLES The Neolithic Revolution marked the emergence of agriculture and the dramatic socioeconomic and cultural changes that it sowed in human civilization. This transition first began between 10,000 and 8,000 BCE in the Fertile Crescent—the narrow strip of the Middle East where Africa, Asia, and Europe converge..What occurred in this region gradually spread to societies on other continents and would drastically alter the lifestyle and social organization of the groups of nomadic hunter-gatherers who had defined human civilization up to then. This transition took place over the course of thousands of years, crossing cultures and in some cases leading to the domestication of entirely new species of plants.LEVANTINE CORRIDORThe Levantine Corridor (Levant),  is located along the eastern coast of the Mediterranean sea.  It includes the modern day countries of Israel, Palestine, southern Syria, Turkey, Jordan, and Lebanon.MESOPOTAMIAMesopotamia, directly to the west of the Levant, is the region in and around the Tigris and Euphrates rivers.  It encompasses modern day Iraq as well as western Syria and the southern edge of Turkey.Before agriculture was established, nomadic societies had a network of campsites, but adopted certain sites as base camps where they would exploit local resources.  In the Fertile Crescent, these included wild einkorn, or “single-grain” wheat (Triticum boeoticum) and wild emmer, or hulled wheat (Triticum turgidum ssp. dicoccoides) which grew abundantly in the wild since 10,000 BCE.  These early cultivated forms of wheat were landraces—wild populations of wheat with unique characteristics naturally adapted to survive in the local environment. It is thought farmers selected these populations because of their superior yield. This was the earliest form of plant breeding. Over time, cultivation and repeated harvesting and sowing of the grains of preferred wild grasses led to the development of domestic strains, or mutant forms of wheat with altered characteristics that were again preferentially chosen by farmers. Einkorn and emmer were some of the first subjects of this experimentation. The high yield and nutritional value of wheat along with its ease of storage and moderately short growing season were undoubtedly factors that contributed to its cultivation.Another asset was that, like other annual grains, einkorn and emmer are largely self-pollinating. This means that desirable traits manipulated or breeded by humans could be perpetuated with less risk of cross-fertilization with wild plants which might have less desirable traits like smaller seeds or seed heads. Other preferable traits were an evenly distributed ripening period and a reduction of the inedible chaff (glumes) that protects the seed kernels and which is separated from seeds during threshing. Domestication also improved the probability of positive yield of the seeds, which under normal circumstances don’t always germinate and form plants. The selected preference towards these or other preferable traits indicates a domesticated variety of cereal. Thanks to the observations, imagination, and experimentation of ancient peoples,  human civilization has been forever transformed by two wild grains. Early farmers discovered a cornucopia when they began domesticating wheat. Active cultivation efforts led to food surpluses that not only provided security, but prompted new social and physical structures to support the harvest of this important crop. Hunting and gathering efforts, which required frequent migrations, were gradually directed towards innovations to make the new agriculture more efficient and productive. Tools like the sickle, quern stone, and scratch plow are emblematic of this transition.   Small villages began to emerge alongside these technological advances. Where necessity once forced groups into nomadic lifestyles, cultivating grains in a fixed location was now a better method for managing their survival. A chain began to emerge: improved technology led to even greater food yields, which promoted a more stable livelihood followed by population growth.   This shift to a sedentary way of life was perhaps the most iconic change associated with the emergence of agriculture. These first settled communities were incubators for increasingly complex social organization, economic systems, religious beliefs, and artistic practices that germinated into civilizations of proportions and influence not seen before.HomeThe story of ghosts in our house,a horizon that crosses our lipshidden by plow and threshing floor.In itis our clay oven and our journeys,our dream of the unknown.From it we leap to one universe after another,and fly one generation after the next.ADONISSyrian poet (1930—)The Neolithic Revolution is one of the most significant chapters in the history of humanity. It was during this period that art, trade, government, religion, science, and social structures took on forms that have since come to shape the order of life on this planet.  Without a doubt, agriculture is the spool around which further revolutions of humankind were spun, with wheat at the core of many great civilizations. Early Neolithic farmers couldn’t have known the far-reaching consequences their simple experiments with seeds would bear. The findings of archeologists  over time, give us the fortune to be able to look back at history and appreciate the magnitude of the transformations that took place during the nearly ten thousand years of this sweeping move to agriculture. Though this transition began in the Fertile Crescent of Mesopotamia, it subsequently took root in other cultures in the world, prompting spread and development of new ideas, technologies, and social, artistic, agricultural, and scientific innovations. Here are some of the many routes and legacies of agriculture across a wider diaspora.THE FIRST DOMESTICATIONS FROM SEED TO CITY THE SPOKES OF THE WHEELTHE SPREAD OF A REVOLUTIONTHE NEOLITIC REVOLUTION SOWING A NEW ERABoth emmer and einkorn wheat share a natural and primitive trait: when mature, the grain of the wild varieties falls to the ground so that it can be spread by the wind. This is because of its fragile rachis, or stem at the very top of the plant where the spikelets, or compartments containing the seeds are held. Those who wish to harvest these grains either have to methodically pick up the grains one by one after they fall to the ground or cut the stem before it ripens. However, in wild populations now and then a natural mutation occurs in individual plants: the rachis that supports the cereal doesn’t bend and break when the grain is mature.If someone is careful to only use these specimens as seed grain they can pass this genetic trait on to new generations of the plant. This is exactly what the first farmers did.EINKORNEMMERThough einkorn and emmer were essential to humanity for several millennia, they are now only grown commercially in a few places in the world. They have largely been replaced by durum (Triticum durum) used in pasta and bread, and wheat (Triticum aestivum) used in bread and other baked goods, both of which are hybridized forms of different cultivated wheats, which, though lower in nutritional value, produce a higher and more stable yields desirable for feeding the ever growing population dependent on these indispensable grains. Today, bread wheat comprises nearly 90 percent of the wheat produced in the world, and durum accounts for the remaining 10 percent.CIVILIZATIONThe Cradle of CULTURE& WHEATFERTILE CRESCENTJERICHOJARMOCATALHAYUKJERF ELAHMARLEVANTINECORRIDOR MESOPOTAMIAEUPHRATESTIGRISFERTILE CRESCENTFERTILE CRESCENT